Add dedicated instances proposal (#468)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/machine-api/dedicated-instances.md

---
title: dedicated-instances
authors:
  - "@alexander-demichev"
reviewers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@enxebre"
approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@enxebre"
creation-date: 2020-09-01
last-updated: 2020-09-01
status: provisional
---

# Dedicated instances

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> Make possible for users to create machines which run as dedicated instances. 

Reviewer: minor nit

```suggestion
Make it possible for users to create machines which run as dedicated instances. 
```

## Motivation

Some organizations need to make sure that their workloads are not hosted on the same physical hardware as others.

### Goals

- Provide automation similar to what Machine API supports for spot instances. 

### Non-Goals

- TODO

## Proposal

> In order to give users ability to run their workloads on dedicated instances we should do the following things for AWS, GCP and Azure:

Reviewer: minor nit

```suggestion
In order to give users the ability to run their workloads on dedicated instances we should do the following things for AWS, GCP and Azure:
```

- Add ability to enable dedicated instances using Machine's provider spec.

> - Validate that provider spec doesn't contain spot instances configuration and dedicated instances at the same time when it's not supported by the cloud provider.

Reviewer 2: Is it noted anywhere if any of the providers support both spot and dedicated? It would surprise me if they did.

Reviewer 3: So then this needs to be updated to reflect that.

> - Make sure that some required changes are supported and implemented on OCP installer side, like proper control plane creation.

Reviewer 2: This would read a bit better if it were worded like this I think, dropping the `some` as it makes the sentence less assertive, in a proposal, everything should be assertive
```suggestion
- Make sure that required changes are supported and implemented within the OCP installer (eg. proper control plane creation).
```

### Implementation Details

> For each of three cloud providers that support dedicated instances the implementation will be different.

Reviewer: just a suggestion, i might drop the "three" part here. although we are talking about 3 specific providers in this enhancement, i feel like we would want to do this for any provider that supports this feature.

```suggestion
For each of the cloud providers that support dedicated instances the implementation will be different.
```

#### AWS

`Dedicated Instances are Amazon EC2 instances that run in a virtual private cloud (VPC) on hardware that's dedicated to a single customer.`. [AWS Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/dedicated-instance.html). Each launched instance has a tenancy attribute and it can be configured similar to how we set availability zone.

```
placement = &ec2.Placement{
  AvailabilityZone: aws.String(machineProviderConfig.Placement.AvailabilityZone),
  Tenancy: aws.String(machineProviderConfig.Placement.Tenancy)
}
```

> That change will require adding `Tenancy` field to provider spec.

Reviewer 2: Might be good to see an example of the field as it would be implemented in Go, eg

```
type AWSMachineProviderConfig struct {
  // existing fields
  ...

  // Tenancy does some awesome thing
  Tenancy string
}
```

Filling out the comment on the field as if it were being properly documented.

Same goes for GCP and Azure too

#### Azure

In order to make dedicated VMs work on Azure we need to understand the concept of host groups and hosts.
[Azure documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/windows/dedicated-hosts).

```
A host group is a resource that represents a collection of dedicated hosts. You create a host group in a region and an availability zone, and add hosts to it.

A host is a resource, mapped to a physical server in an Azure data center. The physical server is allocated when the host is created. A host is created within a host group. A host has a SKU describing which VM sizes can be created. Each host can host multiple VMs, of different sizes, as long as they are from the same size series.

When creating a VM in Azure, you can select which dedicated host to use for your VM. You have full control as to which VMs are placed on your hosts.
```

> Above means that we are required to have a host group and host created, this should probably be handled on installer side. 

Reviewer 2: Again, this should be assertive, you've done the research and come to the conclusion that this should be done by the installer, so we don't need to say `probably` 😄 
```suggestion
Above means that we are required to have a host group and host created, this should be handled on installer side. 
```

> The problem here are standard quotas: for host of type `DSv3-Type1` we can create only 32 VM of type `Standard_D2s_v3`(default type for worker VMs). To request a quota increase, the users are required to create a support request. This part should be well documented

Reviewer 2: Should this get a mention in Risks and Mitigations?

Reviewer: +1, i feel like we should definitely mention the risk of misconfiguration and documentation. we seem to get bit by that a lot.

The required API change is adding host name field `Host` to provider spec.

#### GCP

> GCP provides `Node Templates`, `Node Groups` for managing dedicated instances. Similar to Azure, these should be created using OCP installer. [GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/nodes/sole-tenant-nodes).

Reviewer 2: This is better, more assertive!!! Added a suggestion to make it possibly read better, up to you if you want to accept or not, very minor
```suggestion
GCP requires `Node Templates` and `Node Groups` to be able to create dedicated instances. Similar to Azure, these should be created using OCP installer. [GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/nodes/sole-tenant-nodes).
```

On other doc links you've copied over a relevant excerpt from the text, is there anything that could be copied over here as well?

> In order to be able to create a VM on a dedicated we should introduce `NodeGroup` API field to provider spec.

Reviewer: i feel like there might be a word missing here or something.

maybe this?
```suggestion
In order to be able to create a VM on a dedicated host we should introduce `NodeGroup` API field to provider spec.
```

> We should document that node groups have certain capacity and amount of VMs is limited, unless the node group autoscaler is enabled.

Reviewer: this part is a little confusing to me, does this mean that the node groups have both limited number of VMs and a resource capacity(eg ram, cpu) as well?

Author: The number of VMs is limited by node group capacity. You can create as many VMs as you want until the resources limit is reached.

Reviewer: perhaps this makes it a little clearer?

```suggestion
We should document that node groups have resource capacities which limit the number of VMs, unless the node group autoscaler is enabled.
```

---
title: dedicated-instances
authors:
  - "@alexander-demichev"
reviewers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@enxebre"
approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@enxebre"
creation-date: 2020-09-01
last-updated: 2020-09-01
status: provisional
---

# Dedicated instances

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

Make it possible for users to create machines which run as dedicated instances. 

## Motivation

Some organizations need to make sure that their workloads are not hosted on the same physical hardware as others.

### Goals

> - Provide automation similar to what Machine API supports for spot instances. 

Reviewer 3: "Expose a field in the machine API that enables consumers to choose dedicated tenancy"?

### Non-Goals

- TODO

## Proposal

In order to give users the ability to run their workloads on dedicated instances we should do the following things for AWS, GCP and Azure:

- Add ability to enable dedicated instances using Machine's provider spec.

- Validate that provider spec doesn't contain spot instances configuration and dedicated instances at the same time when it's not supported by the cloud provider.

> - Make sure that required changes are supported and implemented within the OCP installer (eg. proper control plane creation).

Reviewer 3: This effort is scoped to enable to choose dedicated tenancy in the machine API. There's nothing to do on installer side. As a user I can tweak my machine manifests at install time to the extent the API supports.

  // existing fields
  ...

  // Placement specifies where to create the instance in AWS
	Placement Placement `json:"placement"`
}

// Placement indicates where to create the instance in AWS
type Placement struct {
   // existing fields
   ...

  // Tenancy indicates tenant policy for instance
  Tenancy string
}

```

#### Azure

In order to make dedicated VMs work on Azure we need to understand the concept of host groups and hosts.
[Azure documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/windows/dedicated-hosts).

```
A host group is a resource that represents a collection of dedicated hosts. You create a host group in a region and an availability zone, and add hosts to it.

A host is a resource, mapped to a physical server in an Azure data center. The physical server is allocated when the host is created. A host is created within a host group. A host has a SKU describing which VM sizes can be created. Each host can host multiple VMs, of different sizes, as long as they are from the same size series.

When creating a VM in Azure, you can select which dedicated host to use for your VM. You have full control as to which VMs are placed on your hosts.
```

> Above means that we are required to have a host group and host created, this should be handled on installer side. 

Reviewer 3: This needs to be handle out of band. The installer might/ might not choose to support this.

Reviewer 2: @alexander-demichev how much work do you think this is to do manually? Is this something we can outline here so that it can be fleshed out easily in the docs once this feature is merged?

The problem here are standard quotas: for host of type `DSv3-Type1` we can create only 32 VM of type `Standard_D2s_v3`(default type for worker VMs). To request a quota increase, the users are required to create a support request. This part should be well documented

The required API change is adding host name field `Host` to provider spec.

```
type AzureMachineProviderConfig struct {
  // existing fields
  ...

  // Host name of physical server that hosts the virtual machine
  Host string
}
```

#### GCP

> GCP requires `Node Templates` and `Node Groups` to be able to create dedicated instances. Similar to Azure, these should be created using OCP installer. 

Reviewer 3: This needs to be handle out of band. The installer might/ might not choose to support this.

Author: Do you mean that users should do it manually?

Reviewer 2: @alexander-demichev how much work do you think this is to do manually? Is this something we can outline here so that it can be fleshed out easily in the docs once this feature is merged?

```

In order to be able to create a VM on a dedicated host we should introduce `NodeGroup` API field to provider spec.

We should document that node groups have certain capacity and amount of VMs is limited, unless the node group autoscaler is enabled.

```
type GCPMachineProviderConfig struct {
  // existing fields
  ...

  // NodeGroup name of node group that hosts the virtual machine
  NodeGroup string
}
```

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Autoscaling

Autoscaling dedicated instances can be a problem because dedicated hosts have quotas and limits on provider side. We should provide good documentation here.

#### Limited resources for Azure and GCP

To avoid misconfiguration we should document that users are responsible for capacity of their dedicated host on Azure and node groups on GCP

## Design Details

### Open Questions

### Test Plan

### Graduation Criteria

#### Examples

##### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

##### Tech Preview -> GA 

##### Removing a deprecated feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

## Implementation History

## Drawbacks

## Alternatives

> ## Infrastructure Needed

Reviewer 3: this needs to be elaborated

- Validate that provider spec doesn't contain spot instances configuration and dedicated instances at the same time when it's not supported by the cloud provider.

- Make sure that required changes are supported and implemented within the OCP installer (eg. proper control plane creation).

### Implementation Details

For each of the cloud providers that support dedicated instances the implementation will be different.

#### AWS

`Dedicated Instances are Amazon EC2 instances that run in a virtual private cloud (VPC) on hardware that's dedicated to a single customer.`. [AWS Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/dedicated-instance.html). Each launched instance has a tenancy attribute and it can be configured similar to how we set availability zone.

```
placement = &ec2.Placement{
  AvailabilityZone: aws.String(machineProviderConfig.Placement.AvailabilityZone),
  Tenancy: aws.String(machineProviderConfig.Placement.Tenancy)
}
```

That change will require adding `Tenancy` field to provider spec.

```
type AWSMachineProviderConfig struct {
  // existing fields
  ...

  // Placement specifies where to create the instance in AWS

> 	Placement Placement `json:"placement"`

Reviewer 2: Nit, indentation is off here

}

// Placement indicates where to create the instance in AWS
type Placement struct {
   // existing fields
   ...

>   // Tenancy indicates tenant policy for instance
>   Tenancy string

Reviewer 2: I'm gonna assume that there are a finite number of options for this, can we list them here? (Including whichever is the default noted?)
```suggestion
  // Tenancy indicates tenant policy for instance
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum:=<a>,<b>,<c>
  // +kubebuilder:default:=<a>
  Tenancy string
```

}

```

> AWS provides support to both dedicated and spot instances, we need to make sure that this case is also tested.

Reviewer 2: Just a suggestion to make it clearer what this actually means
```suggestion
AWS provides support for spot instances on dedicated tenancy, we need to make sure that this case is also tested.
```

```
A host group is a resource that represents a collection of dedicated hosts. You create a host group in a region and an availability zone, and add hosts to it.

A host is a resource, mapped to a physical server in an Azure data center. The physical server is allocated when the host is created. A host is created within a host group. A host has a SKU describing which VM sizes can be created. Each host can host multiple VMs, of different sizes, as long as they are from the same size series.

When creating a VM in Azure, you can select which dedicated host to use for your VM. You have full control as to which VMs are placed on your hosts.
```

Above means that we are required to have a host group and host created, this should be handled on installer side. 

The problem here are standard quotas: for host of type `DSv3-Type1` we can create only 32 VM of type `Standard_D2s_v3`(default type for worker VMs). To request a quota increase, the users are required to create a support request. This part should be well documented

The required API change is adding host name field `Host` to provider spec.

```
type AzureMachineProviderConfig struct {
  // existing fields
  ...

>   // Host name of physical server that hosts the virtual machine

Reviewer 2: Might be worth making a note that this is optional, I typically use the go generation markers for this as they're reasonably well understood, but up to you how you put it in
```suggestion
  // Host name of physical server that hosts the virtual machine
  // +optional
```

[GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/nodes/sole-tenant-nodes).

```
Node templates

A node template is a regional resource that defines the properties of each node in a node group. 

Node groups and VM provisioning

Sole-tenant node templates define the properties of a node group, and you must create a node template before creating a node group in a Google Cloud zone. When you create a group, specify the maintenance policy for VM instances on the node group, and the number of nodes for the node group. A node group can have zero or more nodes; for example, you can reduce the number of nodes in a node group to zero when you don't need to run any VM instances on nodes in the group, or you can enable the node group autoscaler to manage the size of the node group automatically.
```

In order to be able to create a VM on a dedicated host we should introduce `NodeGroup` API field to provider spec.

We should document that node groups have certain capacity and amount of VMs is limited, unless the node group autoscaler is enabled.

```
type GCPMachineProviderConfig struct {
  // existing fields
  ...

>   // NodeGroup name of node group that hosts the virtual machine
>   NodeGroup string

Reviewer 2: I assume this is optional? Good to mark it as such if it is
```suggestion
  // NodeGroup name of node group that hosts the virtual machine
  // +optional
  NodeGroup string
```

---
title: dedicated-instances
authors:
  - "@alexander-demichev"
reviewers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@enxebre"
approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@enxebre"
creation-date: 2020-09-01
last-updated: 2020-09-01
status: provisional
---

# Dedicated instances

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> Make it possible for users to create machines which run as dedicated instances. 

Reviewer: i think it would be nice to define what a "dedicated instance" is here. maybe just add a second sentence that starts "A dedicated instance is a ...."

```

In order to be able to create a VM on a dedicated host we should introduce `NodeGroup` API field to provider spec.

We should document that node groups have resource capacities which limit the number of VMs, unless the node group autoscaler is enabled.

```
type GCPMachineProviderConfig struct {
  // existing fields
  ...

  // NodeGroup name of node group that hosts the virtual machine
  // +optional
  NodeGroup string
}
```

### Risks and Mitigations

- Different quotas issues in Azure. See [this](#azure) section for more details.
- Azure and GCP will require some [configurations](#infrastructure-needed) on cloud provider side to be made before creating a dedicated instance.

#### Autoscaling

> Autoscaling dedicated instances can be a problem because dedicated hosts have quotas and limits on provider side. We should provide good documentation here.

Reviewer: is there any more detail we could add here, what does the user need to be aware of?

Author: nothing more that I know about

#### Limited resources for Azure and GCP

To avoid misconfiguration we should document that users are responsible for capacity of their dedicated host on Azure and node groups on GCP

## Design Details

### Open Questions

### Test Plan

### Graduation Criteria

#### Examples

##### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

##### Tech Preview -> GA 

##### Removing a deprecated feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

## Implementation History

## Drawbacks

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer: is there any information to be added for these sections?

---
title: dedicated-instances
authors:
  - "@alexander-demichev"
reviewers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@enxebre"
approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@enxebre"
creation-date: 2020-09-01

> last-updated: 2020-09-01

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
last-updated: 2021-08-19
```
